We're starting this lesson talking about the importance
of EHR data security and privacy for EHR.
This is extremely important in today's society.
No one wants their personal health care data to be stolen or lost.
While it's highly unlikely that you would be involved with directly
securing the data or ensuring compliance with the many privacy laws,
anyone who works with this type of data needs to be
aware of the key regulations in common practices.
You might have heard of examples of companies
that have had their data breached in the news.
While that might not seem flashy,
this is very important.
So with that said, let's get started.
To kick off this topic,
let's go over why data security and privacy are important from different perspectives.
Let's start off with taking a basic view of
how medical records are situated between patients,
providers, and a variety of different data users.
I'm sure you can relate to the different experience of
being a patient in a variety of healthcare settings.
But, what is a provider?
Some examples are: healthcare professionals treating you at a hospital,
in a doctor's clinic,
or a dentist's office.
This interaction between a patient and
a provider results in electronic health record being produced.
Electronic health records can be used by data users too.
Who are some data users?
This group can include not only payers,
but also include other groups.
A payer, as we will go over later,
is a group that consists of usually healthcare insurance companies,
but it can also include government payers as well.
To illustrate the importance of data privacy and security from a patient perspective,
here are some examples that can illustrate some unfortunately common issues.
The first example is a case where data privacy was not adhered to,
and made for some embarrassing headlines for a major US health care payer.
In this case, the payer accidentally disclosed that
some patients had HIV via a visible piece of mail.
This illustrates the risk and fear that people have with sharing their medical data,
and especially for people with medical conditions such as cancer, HIV,
and other health conditions who could have this information
disclosed without their consent and have discriminatory treatment.
Unfortunately, this is not an isolated case,
and other companies have suffered from data breaches as well.
As we'll find out later,
this type of breach can put patients at significant risk of identity theft,
since medical data can be used more easily to impersonate someone.
So you might wonder why it is easier to perpetuate identity theft with medical data,
and hence its value to hackers.
Well, the first reason is that unlike financial data,
which tends to have much faster notification,
victims know much later,
and reporting of a breach comes much later than for financial hacking.
Second, there is a lot of detailed information that goes into a medical record,
and this info can be combined to get even more detailed identity information.
Lastly, hackers can use this information to file
false medical claims worth large sums of money.
So to put that in perspective,
the value of medical record data relative to your credit card is much higher,
and even higher than the value of your social security number.
This might be surprising,
but as we previously mentioned,
this data is a lot more valuable to hackers,
and can make it a lot easier to commit identity theft.
Just to review again,
the definition of providers and who they are.
Essentially, they are the medical professionals/organizations
that are providing care to patients.
They're under strict regulatory compliance laws,
and for the most part,
your organization will handle the intricacies of how to interface with providers.
Or if your organization is one,
they have extensive training that you'll go
through as part of the required HIPAA compliance.
To make sure organizations comply,
there are some penalties,
and they can change periodically over time.
Please check the HIPAA website to be up to date.
Here are a few common things that you should be aware of when dealing with PHI,
so that you can avoid HIPAA violations.
First, one thing that is commonly forgotten is to
not email PHI to external accounts by accident.
This was something that I recall.
A lot of care was provided at
my previous company where reminders about not e-mailing PHI were made,
so that was not inadvertently sent to an outside party.
Another common issue that needs to be
mentioned is to not leave portable devices unattended.
This means even in the office,
you're locking your computer when you're not at your desk.
Lastly, make sure you have encryption on portable devices with PHI.
Encryption makes it harder for this data to be used by
others in the case that a device is lost or stolen.
So now we will go into the perspective of why
data security and privacy is important from a data user perspective.
Here are some examples of data users:
payers which include health insurance companies, national insurance organizations,
pharmaceutical companies, and there are
a growing number of other entities using electronic medical records,
such as technology and marketing companies as well.
Data privacy issues come up with not only disclosure from hackers,
but also from legitimate entities with business or medical research purposes.
Let's look at the UK and see how 1.6 million patients did not
have informed consent to have their data used by a Google DeepMind project.
In this example, Google's leading AI group, DeepMind,
was cited for not getting appropriate informed consent for the use of its algorithms.
It's important to get informed consent because it's
an essential part of any scientific experiment.
In a similar vein, in 2019,
a whistle blower raised concerns about Google's effort in the US to
utilize the records of 50 million patients in the Ascension Health Care System.
In this instance, the concern was around obtaining proper patient consent.
These are issues that,
as a data user,
you must be aware of,
and work with the appropriate regulatory authorities to comply with.
Most companies have an experienced legal and compliance team to assist you with this,
and you should work with them to see how to best navigate these issues,
and also flag concerns you might have as well.